add explainer (#75)
w3c/vc-status-list-2021: explainer.md

# StatusList2021 Explained

## Authors

- Mahmoud Alkhraishi (Mavennet)
- Manu Sporny (Digital Bazaar)
- Dave Longley (Digital Bazaar)
- Orie Steele (Transmute)
- Mike Prorock (mesur.io)

## Participate

- [Issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/vc-status-list-2021/issues)
- [Discussion forum](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-vc-wg/)

## Introduction

This specification describes a privacy-preserving, space-efficient, and high-performance mechanism for publishing status information such as suspension or revocation of Verifiable Credentials.

## Goals

Provide a location for an issuer of a Verifiable Credential [VC-Data-Model](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/) to link to a location where a verifier can check to see if a credential has been suspended or revoked.

## How does it work?

> At the most basic level, status information for all verifiable credentials issued by an issuer are expressed as simple binary values. The issuer keeps a bitstring list of all verifiable credentials it has issued. Each verifiable credential is associated with a position in the list. If the binary value of the position in the list is 1 (one), the verifiable credential is revoked; if it is 0 (zero), it is not revoked. The verifier can then check the status of a verifiable credential by looking up the position of the verifiable credential in the bitstring list. This is the basic model used for Revocation and Suspension.

Reviewer: This is no longer accurate as of PR #65.

### Addressing Privacy and Performance

The specification proposes a highly compressible, bitstring-based status list mechanism with strong privacy-preserving characteristics, that is compatible with the architecture of the Web, is highly space-efficient, and lends itself well to content distribution networks. As an example of using this specification to achieve a number of beneficial privacy and performance goals, it is possible to create a status list that can be constructed for 100,000 verifiable credentials that is roughly 12,500 bytes in size in the worst case. In a case where a few hundred credentials have been revoked, the size of the list is less than a few hundred bytes while providing privacy in a herd of 100,000 individuals.

> 1. It is possible for verifiers to increase the privacy of the holder whose verifiable credential is being checked by caching status lists that have been fetched from remote servers. By caching the content locally, less correlatable information can be inferred from verifier-based access patterns on the status list.
> 2. The use of content distribution networks by issuers can increase the privacy of holders by reducing or eliminating requests for the status lists from the issuer. Often, a request for a revocation list will be served by an edge device and thus be faster and reduce the load on the server as well as cloaking verifiers and holders from issuers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It is possible for verifiers to increase the privacy of holders whose verifiable credentials are being checked by caching status lists that have been fetched from remote servers. By caching the content locally, less correlatable information can be inferred from verifier-based access patterns on the status list.
* The use of content distribution networks (CDNs) by issuers can increase the privacy of holders by reducing or eliminating requests for the status lists directly from the issuer. Often, a request for a revocation list can be served by an edge device and thus be faster and reduce the load on the server, as well as cloaking verifiers and holders from issuers.
```
